docs: Add macOS Keychain Sharing guide for authentication (#4512) (#665)
serverpod/serverpod_docs: docs/06-concepts/04-authentication/08-macos-authentication.md

---

# Set up authentication on macOS

Serverpod stores sign-in tokens in the macOS Keychain so sessions survive app restarts. Sandboxed macOS apps need a Keychain Sharing entitlement before they can read or write that data. This guide adds the entitlement to your Flutter project. It takes a few minutes and applies to every sign-in method (email, Google, Apple, and others).

## Before you start

- A Serverpod project with the [authentication module](./setup) enabled (the default when you create a project with `serverpod create`).
- A Flutter app that calls `client.auth.initialize()` on startup (included in the project template).
- Xcode installed, if you prefer adding the entitlement through the Xcode UI.

## Add the Keychain Sharing entitlement

Add the following to both entitlements files in your Flutter app:

- `macos/Runner/DebugProfile.entitlements`
- `macos/Runner/Release.entitlements`

```xml title="macos/Runner/DebugProfile.entitlements"
<key>keychain-access-groups</key>
<array/>
```

Copy the same block into `macos/Runner/Release.entitlements`.

> The empty array enables Keychain access without creating a shared App Group. Leave the array empty unless you have a specific reason to add a group identifier.

Reviewer: Suggestion: entries in `keychain-access-groups` are keychain access groups, not App Groups (a separate capability), so this reads more accurately as:

```suggestion
The empty array enables Keychain access without sharing keychain items with other apps. Leave the array empty unless you have a specific reason to add a group identifier.
```

Rebuild and run your app:

```bash
cd <project>_flutter
flutter run -d macos
```

## Verify

1. Sign in through any configured provider (email is the quickest to test).
2. Confirm the app shows your signed-in content without an error.
3. Stop and restart the app. The user should still be signed in.

If sign-in still fails, see [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting).

## Advanced

### Add the entitlement in Xcode

1. Open `macos/Runner.xcworkspace` in Xcode.
2. Select the **Runner** target, then open **Signing & Capabilities**.
3. Click **+ Capability** and add **Keychain Sharing**.
4. Repeat for **Debug**, **Profile**, and **Release** build configurations if they use separate entitlements files.

Xcode writes the same Keychain Sharing entry (`keychain-access-groups`) into your entitlements files.

### Use the login keychain for local development

If you run unsigned macOS builds locally and want to avoid Keychain Sharing entitlements entirely, configure secure storage to use the login keychain instead of the Data Protection Keychain. In your app's `main.dart`, override the session manager storage:

```dart
import 'package:flutter_secure_storage/flutter_secure_storage.dart';

> import 'package:serverpod_auth_core_flutter/serverpod_auth_core_flutter.dart';

Reviewer: Suggestion: these two packages are not direct dependencies of a scaffolded app, so importing them directly trips the analyzer's `depend_on_referenced_packages` lint. The app already depends on `serverpod_auth_idp_flutter`, which re-exports both `FlutterSecureStorage` and the session-manager classes:

```suggestion
import 'package:serverpod_auth_idp_flutter/serverpod_auth_idp_flutter.dart';
```

client = Client(serverUrl)
  ..connectivityMonitor = FlutterConnectivityMonitor()
  ..authSessionManager = FlutterAuthSessionManager(
    storage: SecureClientAuthSuccessStorage(
      secureStorage: const FlutterSecureStorage(
        mOptions: MacOsOptions(
          usesDataProtectionKeychain: false,
        ),
      ),
    ),
  );
```

This path requires `flutter_secure_storage` 10.3.1 or later. Projects created with `serverpod create` pin an earlier version in `pubspec.yaml` dependency overrides, so bump the override before using this option:

```yaml title="pubspec.yaml"
dependency_overrides:
  flutter_secure_storage: ^10.3.1

> ```

Reviewer: Suggestion: two details here do not match current versions. The `usesDataProtectionKeychain: false` behavior needs `flutter_secure_storage` 10.3.0, where the flag stopped being applied unconditionally, and `serverpod create` sets the override to `^10.0.0`, so new projects already resolve a compatible version without editing `pubspec.yaml`. Older projects only need `flutter pub upgrade flutter_secure_storage`.

```suggestion
This path requires `flutter_secure_storage` 10.3.0 or later, where `usesDataProtectionKeychain: false` started taking effect. Projects created with `serverpod create` already resolve a compatible version. If your project was created earlier, run `flutter pub upgrade flutter_secure_storage` to update the lockfile.
```
